Database 1 - Introduction to SQL

What will we learn today?​

Introduction to databases
Why do we need them?
Different types of database
Introduction to PostgreSQL
What is SQL?
What is a RDBMS?
What characterises a relational database?
Database modeling exercise
Check your PostgreSQL installation
Communicating with the database using SQL
Creating a new database
Creating a table
Inserting data
Retrieving data
Retrieving data with conditions

Learning Objectives​

By the end of this lesson trainees should be able to

Explain why databases are needed in Web Development
Define what SQL is and what it is used for
Describe what table, rows and columns are used for in a relational database
Install and create a database using PostgreSQL
Create a table in a database using PostgreSQL
Insert data into a table using PostgreSQL
Retrieve data from a table using PostgreSQL
Retrieve data from a table using conditionals in PostgreSQL
List the different kinds of data that can be held in a PostgreSQL database

Introduction to databases​

A database is a structured set of data held in a computer. It provides ways to store, 
retrieve and organize information.

Why do we need them?​

In the past few weeks, you stored and retrieved data using files.
This is fine for simple data but it can quickly become an issue
as your application becomes more complex and needs to store and
manipulate more complicated data. For example, imagine you want
to develop the next biggest hotel booking application. You will
need to store the list of hotels available for booking somewhere,
and as you add more features, you will need to save users information, 
the reviews they post for each hotel, but also the bookings each user makes. 
You can see that the data you need to handle can become very complicated,
especially when you need to consider that data are not static, as they
can be updated or deleted. To work more effectively with data, we can
then use a database, which present the following benefits:

A database defines a structure for your data and the relationships between entities
A database provides convenient and performant ways to safely store and retrieve data
A database provides a mechanism to check the validity of your data

Different types of database
There are many different kinds of database and different implementations. 
Sometimes, a database type is a better fit to certain use case or certain problems.
The most well-known database types include relational database, key/value database,
graph database and document database (also known as NoSQL). For this class, we will
focus specifically on relational database as they are the most widely used and supported. 
You can consult DB-Engines to see a ranking of the most used database,
as you can see, there is a lot of them!

Introduction to PostgreSQL
"PostgreSQL is a powerful, open source object-relational database system that uses and
extends the SQL language combined with many features that safely store and scale the most
complicated data workloads. The origins of PostgreSQL date back to 1986 as part of the
POSTGRES project at the University of California at Berkeley and has more than 30 years
of active development on the core platform." (source: postgresql.org)

What is SQL?
Pronounced S-Q-L or sequel
Stands for Structured Query Language
SQL is the standard language used to communicate with relational database
SQL statements are used to query, create, update, delete records in a database
SQL statements are executed by a RDBMS.

What is a RDBMS?
Stands for Relational Database Management System
It is a program that processes SQL statements to manage a relational database
PostgreSQL is a RDBMS.

What characterizes a relational database?
As mentioned previously, a relational database is a specific type of 
database. Data is stored in tables of rows and columns as per the example below:
(img1)
How about storing everything in one big table as shown below? Why isn't it a good idea?

A customer could have several bookings. If the customer changes their telephone number,
you would have to update every single rows for this customer with their new number, 
which is more prone to errors. As a general rule, try to avoid duplication of data,
and instead design your system in a way that you have a single source of truth for
each piece of data. The example below is NOT a good solution.
(img2)

Database modeling exercise

Scenario: You've been hired to create a database for a new company which wants 
to revolutionize the hotel booking market. The first task you've been given is 
to model how the company would store its data in a database. Here are your requirements:

The company wants to store in the database all the hotels available on their website
For each hotel, the company wants to record the name and the number of rooms. Also each
hotel can have several room types and each room type has a specific price.
The company also needs to store the information of customers who registered on their
website with a name, an email and an address.
Customers need to be able to record their bank details which consist of an account
number and a sort code. Each customer can register several bank accounts if they want.
Finally, as customers can book a room in an hotel starting on a specific date for a
specific number of nights, the company wants to store the bookings.
With mentors help, model the database for this company. In particular,
show the different entities, fields and relationships between each entity.

Communicating with the database using SQL
All commands in the following need to be entered in a psql command prompt.
However, sometimes it's easier to write the code in a file and then load 
the file with psql. For example, if you write your SQL code in a file 
called test.sql, you can then execute it with 
psql -d DATABASE_NAME -f test.sql.

Creating a new database
In a terminal, create a new database named cyf_hotels with the following command:
createdb cyf_hotels

Then connect to your database with:
psql cyf_hotels

Creating a table
Data are stored in tables. Let's first create a customers table 
to hold the details of customers.

CREATE TABLE customers (
  id        SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
  name      VARCHAR(30) NOT NULL,
  email     VARCHAR(120) NOT NULL,
  address   VARCHAR(120),
  city      VARCHAR(30),
  postcode  VARCHAR(12),
  country   VARCHAR(20)
);

The above SQL query creates a new table named "customers" with the following columns:

id: a serial primary key column that automatically generates a unique ID number for each row.
name: a required column for the customer's name, with a maximum length of 30 characters.
email: a required column for the customer's email address, with a maximum length of 120 characters.
address: an optional column for the customer's street address, with a maximum length of 120 characters.
city: an optional column for the customer's city of residence, with a maximum length of 30 characters.
postcode: an optional column for the customer's postal code, with a maximum length of 12 characters.
country: an optional column for the customer's country of residence, with a maximum length of 20 characters.

The SERIAL data type is used for the id column, which automatically generates a unique ID number for each new 
row inserted into the table. The PRIMARY KEY constraint is applied to the id column, which ensures 
that each ID is unique and cannot be null. The NOT NULL constraint is applied to the name and email columns,
which means that these columns must have a value in every row.

More explanation for the SQL statement above:

SERIAL PRIMARY KEY defines the column id as a unique identifier for each row.
Moreover, this identifier will automatically incremented every time data is inserted. 
id is called the primary key of the table customers.
VARCHAR(20) defines the column to hold text data with a maximum length of 20 characters
NOT NULL defines the column as not nullable, which means that you must set a value.
Other useful types include INT, TEXT, BOOLEAN and DATE.
The database will reject any values which don't match the type.

EXERCISE 1
-Create the customers table in the cyf_hotels database.
CREATE TABLE customers (
  id        SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
  name      VARCHAR(30) NOT NULL,
  email     VARCHAR(120) NOT NULL,
  address   VARCHAR(120),
  city      VARCHAR(30),
  postcode  VARCHAR(12),
  country   VARCHAR(20)
);
-Verify that the table customers is created with the psql command
\dt which lists the existing tables.

-Display the table customers definition with the command \d customers
and verify that it matches what you expect.

-Create a new table hotels in the cyf_hotels database with the following
columns: an id, a name, the number of rooms and the hotel postcode.

CREATE TABLE hotels (
  id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
  name VARCHAR(50) NOT NULL,
  room_count INTEGER NOT NULL,
  postcode VARCHAR(12) NOT NULL
);


Use the commands above to verify that the table is correctly created.

Now that we have a table to store customers and a table to store hotels, 
we can create a table to hold the bookings of customers for an hotel with 
the checkin date and the number of nights they intend to stay:

CREATE TABLE bookings (
  id               SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
  customer_id      INT REFERENCES customers(id),
  hotel_id         INT REFERENCES hotels(id),
  checkin_date     DATE NOT NULL,
  nights           INT NOT NULL
);

In the above, customer_id and hotel_id are called foreign keys as they 
reference an id from a different table. This set a very strong constraint 
as you will not be able to create a booking for a customer id which does 
not exist in the customers table!

EXERCISE 2
Create the table bookings in your cyf_hotels database 
and verify that it is correctly created. (DONE ABOVE)

Inserting data
Once your customers, hotels and bookings table are created, 
you can insert data with the following SQL statements:

INSERT INTO customers (name, email, address, city, postcode, country) VALUES ('John Smith','j.smith@johnsmith.org','11 New Road','Liverpool','L10 2AB','UK');
INSERT INTO hotels (name, rooms, postcode) VALUES ('Triple Point Hotel', 10, 'CM194JS');
INSERT INTO bookings (customer_id, hotel_id, checkin_date, nights) VALUES (1, 1, '2019-10-01', 2);

EXERCISE
Run the 3 SQL statements above.
Insert yourself in the customers table.
Insert the following 3 hotels in the hotels table:
The Triple Point Hotel has 10 rooms, its postcode is CM194JS
The Royal Cosmos Hotel has 5 rooms, its postcode is TR209AX
The Pacific Petal Motel has 15 rooms, its postcode is BN180TG

Try to insert a booking for a customer id which does not exist
in the customers table (for example ID 100). What is happening and why?

-- Insert data for Triple Point Hotel
INSERT INTO hotels (name, room_count, postcode)
VALUES ('Triple Point Hotel', 10, 'CM194JS');

-- Insert data for Royal Cosmos Hotel
INSERT INTO hotels (name, room_count, postcode)
VALUES ('Royal Cosmos Hotel', 5, 'TR209AX');

-- Insert data for Pacific Petal Motel
INSERT INTO hotels (name, room_count, postcode)
VALUES ('Pacific Petal Motel', 15, 'BN180TG');

If you try to insert a booking for a customer ID that does not exist 
in the "customers" table (for example, ID 100), you will get a foreign 
key constraint violation error. This is because the "bookings" table has 
a foreign key constraint on the "customer_id" column that references the "id"
column in the "customers" table.

When you try to insert a new booking with a customer ID that does not
exist in the "customers" table, the foreign key constraint will fail
because it cannot find a matching customer ID in the referenced table.
This will result in an error message indicating that the foreign key 
constraint has been violated.

The exact error message will depend on the database system you are using,
but it will typically be something like:

ERROR:  insert or update on table "bookings" violates foreign key constraint "bookings_customer_id_fkey"
DETAIL:  Key (customer_id)=(100) is not present in table "customers".

To fix this error, you need to ensure that the customer ID you are inserting
into the "bookings" table already exists in the "customers" table.

Retrieving data
Previously, you have inserted data in your tables. How do you make sure
these data have been inserted correctly? The following SQL statement
is used to request data from a specific table:

SELECT * FROM customers;

Exercise 4
EXERCISE
Use the above SQL statement to display all the data inserted in the customers table.
Use the above SQL statement to display all the data inserted in the hotels table.
Use the above SQL statement to display all the data inserted in the bookings table.

